darvāsāssuravanitāptadivyamālyaṃ
śakrāya svayamupadāya tatra bhūya: |
nāgendrapratimṛdite śaśāpa śakraṃ
kā kṣāntistvaditaradevatāṃśajānām ||1||
durvāsā:-	the sage Durvaasaa
sura-vanitā-āpta-divya-mālyaṃ	from heavenly nymphs had obtained a divine garland
śukrāya svayam-upadāya tatra bhūya:	to Indra,having personally given it there then
nāgendra-pratimṛdite	by Indra's elephant it being trampled
śaśāpa śakraṃ	cursed Indra
kā kṣānti:-	what forbearance (is there)
tvat-itara-	other than Thee
devatā-aṃśajānām	who are born of (other than Thee) Devas
The sage Durvaasaa once gave a celestial garland to Indra, which he had got from heavenly nymphs. When he saw the garland being crushed by Indra's elephant, he cursed Indra. Where can forbearance be seen except in those born of and blessed by Thee.
śāpena prathitajare'tha nirjarendre
deveṣvapyasurajiteṣu niṣprabheṣu |
śarvādyā: kamalajametya sarvadevā
nirvāṇaprabhava samaṃ bhavantamāpu: ||2||
śāpena prathita-jare-atha	due to the curse Indra became aged, then
nirjara-indre	Indra, who was ageless
deveṣu-api-asura-jiteṣu	when the Devas also were defeated by the Asuras
niṣprabheṣu	(and so) had lost their glory
śarva-ādyā:	beginning with Shiva
kamalajam-etya	approaching Brahmaa
sarva-devā:	all the gods
nirvāṇa-prabhava	O Bestower of Salvation!
samaṃ	with (Shiva)
bhavantam-āpu:	came to Thee
O Bestower of Liberation! Indra known as the unaging one, became aged as a result of Durvaasaa's curse. His followers, the Devas lost all their glory and were defeated by the Asuraas. The gods along with Shiva and others went to Brahmaa and they all took refuge in Thee.
brahmādyai: stutamahimā ciraṃ tadānīṃ
prāduṣṣan varada pura: pareṇa dhāmnā |
he devā ditijakulairvidhāya sandhiṃ
pīyūṣaṃ parimathateti paryaśāstvam ||3||
brahmā-ādyai:	by Brahmaa and other gods
stuta-mahimā ciraṃ	being sung Thy excellences for long
tadānīṃ	at that time
prāduṣṣan	appearing
varada	O Bestower of Boons!
pura:	in front (of them)
pareṇa dhāmnā	with supreme glory (commanded)
he devā	O Gods!
ditija-kulai:-	with the Asuras,
vidhāya sandhiṃ	making peace,
pīyūṣaṃ parimathata-	nectar churn out
iti paryaśā:-tvam	thus commanded Thee
Brahmaa and the other gods sung Thy excellences for long. O Bestower of Boons! Thou then manifested Thyself before them in great glory and commanded them to make peace with the Asuras and then prepare to churn the milk ocean for nectar.
sandhānaṃ kṛtavati dānavai: suraughe
manthānaṃ nayati madena mandarādrim |
bhraṣṭe'smin badaramivodvahan khagendre
sadyastvaṃ vinihitavān paya:payodhau ||4||
sandhānaṃ kṛtavati	having made peace
dānavai: suraughe	with the Asuras by the gods
manthānaṃ nayati	when carrying the churning rod
madena mandara-adrim	with great pride, the Mandara mountain
bhraṣṭe-asmin	(when) it fell down
badaram-iva-udvahan	as a berry picking it up
khagendre sadya:-tvam	On Garuda immediately Thou
vinihitavān	placed it
paya:payodhau	in the milk ocean
Devas made peace with the Asuras and with great pride carried the Mandara mountain for use as a churning rod. The mountain fell from their hands on the way. Then Thou seated on Garuda, picked it up as if it were a tiny berry and installed it in the milk ocean.
ādhāya drutamatha vāsukiṃ varatrāṃ
pāthodhau vinihitasarvabījajāle |
prārabdhe mathanavidhau surāsuraistai-
rvyājāttvaṃ bhujagamukhe'karossurārīn ||5||
ādhāya drutam-atha	placing quickly then
vāsukiṃ varatrāṃ	Vaasuki (snake) (as the ) churning rope
pāthodhau	in that milk ocean
vinihita-sarva-bīja-jāle	(in which) had been put all kinds of seeds and herbs
prārabdhe mathana-vidhau	having started the process of churning
sur-asurai:-tai:-	by those gods and Asuras
vyājāt-tvaṃ	Thou by a trick
bhujaga-mukhe-akaro:-	on the side of the serpent's mouth (Thou) put
surārīn	the Asuras
Then quickly placing Vasuki snake as the churning rope, the Devas and Asuras started the process of churning the milk ocean in which all kinds of herbs and seeds had been put. Thou then cleverly made the Asuras hold the head end of the snake.
kṣubdhādrau kṣubhitajalodare tadānīṃ
dugdhābdhau gurutarabhārato nimagne |
deveṣu vyathitatameṣu tatpriyaiṣī
prāṇaiṣī: kamaṭhatanuṃ kaṭhorapṛṣṭhām ||6||
kṣubdha-ādrau	(when) the mountain (used as) a churning rod
kṣubhita-jala-udare	in the waters fully stirred
tadānīṃ	then
dugdha-abdhau	of the milk ocean
gurutara-bhārata:	because of its (mountain's) heavy weight
nimagne	sank
deveṣu vyathitatameṣu	the Devas becoming very worried
tat-priyaiṣī	their (the Deva's) wellwisher (Thou)
prāṇaiṣī:	assumed
kamaṭha-tanuṃ	a tortoise form
kaṭhora-pṛṣṭhām	with a hard back
When the Mandara mountain as a churning rod had fully stirred the waters of the milk ocean to its depth, it sank due to its own weight. The Devas became very worried. Thee who are their well wisher, assumed the form of a tortoise with a hard back.
vajrātisthiratarakarpareṇa viṣṇo
vistārātparigatalakṣayojanena |
ambhodhe: kuharagatena varṣmaṇā tvaṃ
nirmagnaṃ kṣitidharanāthamunninetha ||7||
vajra-ati-sthira-karpareṇa	with the back more hard than the thunderbolt
viṣṇo	O All Pervading being!
vistārāt-	and in extent (width)
parigata-lakṣa-yojanena	exceeding a lakh of Yojanas
ambhodhe: kuhara-gatena	(the rod) which had sunk deep into the ocean
varṣmaṇā tvaṃ	with such a body Thou
nirmgnaṃ kṣitidharanātham-	the great mountain which had sunk (into the sea)
unninetha	(Thou) lifted up
O All pervading Being! by diving deep into the ocean Thou lifted up the sinking mountain on Thy back which was harder than a thunderbolt and more than a lakh of Yojanas in width.
unmagne jhaṭiti tadā dharādharendre
nirmethurdṛḍhamiha sammadena sarve |
āviśya dvitayagaṇe'pi sarparāje
vaivaśyaṃ pariśamayannavīvṛdhastān ||8||
unmagne	(the mountain) having come up
jhaṭiti tadā	quickly then
dharādharendre	the mountain,
nirmethu:-dṛḍham-iha	they churned with great force, here
sammadena sarve	(and) with enthusiasm all of them (the Asuras and the Devas)
āviśya	(Thou) entering
dvitayagaṇe-	into both the parties
api sarparāje	and also the serpent Vasuki
vaivaśyaṃ	their fatigue
pariśamayan	removing
avīvṛdha: tān	invigorated them
When the mountain was lifted up, they, the Devas and Asuras all churned with great force and enthusiasm. Thou entering into both the parties and also into the snake Vasuki, removed their fatigue and invigorated them.
uddāmabhramaṇajavonnamadgirīndra-
nyastaikasthiratarahastapaṅkajaṃ tvām |
abhrānte vidhigiriśādaya: pramodā-
dudbhrāntā nunuvurupāttapuṣpavarṣā: ||9||
uddāma-bhramaṇa-java-	by the powerful speed of the whirling
unnamat-girīndra-	the mountain having come up
nyasta-eka-sthiratara-hasta-paṅkajam	placed one strong lotus hand firmly
tvām	Thou
abhrānte	in the heavens
vidhi-giriśa-ādaya:	Brahmaa Shiva and other gods
pramodāt-udbhrāntā	overwhelmed with joy
nunuvu:-	praised Thee
upātta-puṣpa-varṣā:	and shed showers of flowers
When the Mandara mountain rose up because of the powerful speed of the whirling, Thou placed Thy one lotus hand firmly on it, to keep it in position. Brahmaa Shiva and other gods were overwhelmed with joy and praised Thee as they shed showers of flowers.
daityaughe bhujagamukhānilena tapte
tenaiva tridaśakule'pi kiñcidārte |
kāruṇyāttava kila deva vārivāhā:
prāvarṣannamaragaṇānna daityasaṅghān ||10||
daityaughe	(when) the group of Asuras
bhujaga-mukha-anilena	by the fire from the mouth of the serpent (the poisonous breath)
tapte	were scorched (tormented)
tena-eva	by that even
tridaśakule-api	the Devas also
kiñcit-ārte	were troubled a little
kāruṇyāt-tava	by Thy compassion
kila deva	Indeed O Lord!
vārivāha: prāvarṣan-	The clouds were made to rain
amaragaṇān-	on the Devas
na daitya-saṅghān	not on the Asuras
The group of Asuras were scorched by the fire emitting from the mouth of the serpent. The Devas were also to some extent troubled. O Lord! By Thy compassion the clouds were made to rain on the Devas to cool them, but not on the Asuras.
udbhrāmyadbahutiminakracakravāle
tatrābdhau ciramathite'pi nirvikāre |
ekastvaṃ karayugakṛṣṭasarparāja:
saṃrājan pavanapureśa pāhi rogāt ||11||
udbhrāmyat	ejecting up
bahu-timi-nakra-cakravāle	many fish crocodiles and other aquatic creatures
tatra-abdhau	there (when) the ocean
cira-mathite-api	in spite being churned for long
nirvikāre	remained unchanged
eka:-tvaṃ	Thou alone
kara-yuga-kṛṣṭa-sarparāja:	with (Thy) two hands pulled the (two ends) of the serpent king
saṃrājan	shining brightly
pavanapureśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi rogāt	relieve (me of my) diseases
In spite of being churned for long, the ocean remained unchanged, though many fish crocodile and other aquatic creatures were thrown up. Thou alone, then, shining brilliantly, with Thy two hands pulled the two ends of the serpent. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Relieve me of my diseases.